.TH WORKCELL 1 "2026-04-14" "Workcell" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
workcell \- bounded runtime launcher for coding agents
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B workcell
[\fIoptions\fR] [\fB--\fR \fIprovider-args\fR ...]
.br
.B workcell publish-pr
[\fIoptions\fR]
.br
.B workcell session
\fIstart|attach|send|stop|list|show|delete|logs|timeline|diff|export\fR [\fIoptions\fR]
.br
.B workcell auth
\fIinit|set|unset|status\fR [\fIoptions\fR]
.br
.B workcell policy
\fIshow|validate|diff\fR [\fIoptions\fR]
.br
.B workcell why
--credential \fIKEY\fR --agent \fINAME\fR [\fIoptions\fR]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B workcell
starts the selected coding agent inside a bounded local runtime with explicit
isolation and policy controls.
.B workcell
launches the selected provider directly inside that runtime; there is no
separate attach or connect step after launch.
The Tier 1 path is a dedicated Colima virtual machine profile on macOS plus a
hardened container inside that VM.
The managed runtime mounts
.I /tmp
as
.B noexec
and uses
.I /state/tmp
as the exec-capable temporary directory via
.BR TMPDIR .
The supported host platform is Apple Silicon macOS.
.TP
.B workcell session start|attach|send|stop|list|show|delete|logs|timeline|diff|export
Launch, control, inspect, diff, export, and delete durable detached sessions
without starting a second Workcell runtime. Detached sessions default to an
isolated clean git clone of the selected workspace, while the host-side
inventory and retained-log commands operate on durable session records plus the
matching profile audit state.
.TP
.B workcell policy show|validate|diff
Inspect the merged host-side injection policy without starting the runtime.
.TP
.B workcell why
Explain why a credential is selected, filtered, or still only configured for a
specific agent and mode without starting the runtime. The output also includes
bootstrap path, support tier, and next-step fields for the selected
credential.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B --agent codex|claude|gemini
Select the provider to run. This option is required.
.TP
.B --agent-autonomy yolo|prompt
Select the provider approval posture. The default is
.BR yolo ,
which means Workcell injects the provider's no-prompt mode. Use
.BR prompt
to opt back into the provider's normal approval flow.
Prompt autonomy is a lower-assurance choice because provider-native approval
state or session-local policy can change during the live session.
.TP
.B --agent-arg VALUE
Append provider-native argv at launch. This option is repeatable and does not
require repeating
.BR codex ,
.BR claude ,
or
.BR gemini
in the provider argv. These values are still validated as ordinary user-supplied
provider arguments inside the managed runtime.
.TP
.B --codex-rules-mutability readonly|session
Select Codex execpolicy mutability. The default is
.BR readonly ,
which keeps Codex rules linked to the immutable adapter baseline on the managed
path until the session is already downgraded by package mutation or prompt
autonomy. Use
.BR session
only when you explicitly want session-local Codex execpolicy amendments to
persist across nested Codex launches until container exit. That is surfaced as
.BR codex_rules_assurance_effective_initial=lower-assurance-session-rules .
.TP
.B --container-mutability ephemeral|readonly
Select whether the inner runtime root filesystem is writable but session-local
.RB ( ephemeral )
or read-only
.RB ( readonly ).
The default is
.BR ephemeral .
When
.B ephemeral
is selected, Workcell also allows
.BR apt
and
.BR apt-get
to reach the pinned Debian snapshot endpoints so transient build tooling can be
installed without widening to arbitrary distro mirrors.
Successful package mutations are treated as a lower-assurance in-session
downgrade because maintainer scripts run as root inside the mutable container;
Workcell warns when that happens and keeps the downgrade visible until the
container exits.
This lane adds only the minimal Linux capabilities required for the
root-to-runtime-user handoff inside the container:
.BR SETUID
and
.BR SETGID .
.RS
.TP
.B strict + ephemeral
Default mutable managed provider path with
.BR container_assurance=managed-mutable .
This allows transient package installs, but a successful package mutation
downgrades the live session to
.BR lower-assurance-package-mutation
until exit.
.TP
.B strict + readonly
Strongest managed path with
.BR container_assurance=managed-readonly .
Package-manager writes stay blocked, so the in-session control-plane posture
does not downgrade.
.TP
.B development + ephemeral
Managed interactive path with broader dependency egress and
.BR execution_path=lower-assurance-development .
It keeps the same VM-plus-container boundary and workspace control-plane
masking as
.BR strict ,
but allows managed non-provider command execution through the reviewed
development wrapper.
.TP
.B --agent-autonomy prompt
Keeps the provider's approval flow, but Workcell surfaces that separately as
.BR autonomy_assurance=lower-assurance-prompt-autonomy .
.RE
.TP
.B --container-cpu COUNT
Set an explicit CPU limit for the inner runtime container.
.TP
.B --container-memory SIZE
Set an explicit memory limit for the inner runtime container, for example
.BR 4g .
.TP
.B --cache-profile off|standard
Select whether Workcell mounts an opt-in host-persisted non-secret cache plane
into the runtime. The default is
.BR off .
Using
.BR standard
persists package-index and compiler caches such as npm, pip, Cargo, Go, and
.BR ccache ,
scoped to the current workspace by default, but it is still a lower-assurance
path and is not treated as part of the clean
.B strict
session boundary.
.TP
.B --injection-policy PATH
Use an explicit host-side injection policy for this launch. Workcell mounts
credential sources read-only from their original host paths and stages the
selected docs, copied files, and SSH material into per-session runtime state
instead of passing through host homes or sockets directly.
.TP
.B workcell auth init|set|unset|status
Manage explicit host-side credential policy state without starting the Workcell
runtime. Resolver-backed credentials are still host-only preprocessing and do
not pass Keychain or provider-home access into Tier 1.
.B workcell auth status
also reports the provider bootstrap summary for the selected agent.
.TP
.B workcell policy show|validate|diff
Render the merged policy, validate fail-closed source-backed entries, or diff
the selected entrypoint file against the canonical merged render.
.TP
.B workcell why
Explain one credential decision, including agent scope, selector filtering, and
whether the selected entry is ready or still configured-only on the host,
together with the corresponding bootstrap path, support tier, and next-step
summary. When omitted,
.B --mode
defaults to
.BR strict .
.TP
.B --log-level normal|debug
Select launch-time logging verbosity. The default is
.BR normal .
Use
.BR debug
to surface successful Colima and runtime-build output in addition to the normal
high-signal launcher messages.
.TP
.B --no-spinner
Disable the interactive launch spinner and fall back to heartbeat text updates
instead. This affects only interactive launch and prepare flows.
.TP
.B --debug-log PATH
Persist launcher stderr plus any build/output streams that Workcell explicitly
forwards through the launcher to
.IR PATH .
This is an explicit lower-assurance host logging path because provider output
may be retained outside the ephemeral runtime, and Workcell prints an explicit
warning banner when it is enabled. This flag is only valid for real launched
sessions.
.TP
.B --file-trace-log PATH
Persist a host-retained file transaction trace from inside the session home to
.IR PATH .
This is an explicit lower-assurance host logging path because it records
session-local file operations outside the ephemeral runtime. Workcell prints an
explicit warning banner when it is enabled. This flag is only valid for real
launched sessions.
.TP
.B --audit-transcript PATH
Persist a full interactive terminal transcript, including typed input and child
output, to
.IR PATH .
The retained transcript also includes session start and end timestamps plus the
final exit code.
This requires an interactive terminal and is an explicit lower-assurance host
logging path. Workcell prints an explicit warning banner when it is enabled.
This flag is only valid for real launched sessions.
.TP
.B --no-default-injection-policy
Ignore
.I ~/.config/workcell/injection-policy.toml
for this launch even if it exists.
.TP
.B --ui cli|gui
Select the surface to launch. Only
.BR cli
is currently implemented as a preserved-boundary path.
.TP
.B --mode strict|development|build|breakglass
Select the runtime profile. The default is
.BR strict .
.TP
.B --prepare
Seed or refresh the prepared runtime image before continuing with the requested
launch. Normal strict launches do this automatically when the reviewed image is
missing or stale.
.TP
.B --prepare-only
Seed or refresh the prepared runtime image and then exit without launching a
session. This is the recommended prewarm path when you want to remove the cold
build cost ahead of time.
.TP
.B --repair-profile
Delete a conflicting unmanaged Colima profile before launch so Workcell can
recreate it with reviewed mounts and policy. On
.BR strict ,
this also implies
.B --prepare
because the recreated profile starts empty.
.TP
.B --ack-breakglass
Required with
.B --mode breakglass
to make the higher-trust path explicit.
.TP
.B --ack-arbitrary-command
Required with
.B --allow-arbitrary-command
to make lower-assurance boundary-debugging command passthrough explicit.
.TP
.B --ack-control-plane-vcs
Required with
.B --allow-control-plane-vcs
to make the lower-assurance control-plane Git lane explicit.
.TP
.B --workspace PATH
Select the workspace to mount inside the runtime. The default is the current
directory.
.TP
.B --session-workspace direct|isolated
Select how
.B workcell session start
maps the detached workspace. The default is
.BR isolated ,
which requires a clean self-contained git workspace and creates a session-owned
clone. Use
.BR direct
when you intentionally want the detached session to reuse the current workspace
path in place.
.TP
.B --allow-nongit-workspace
Allow a non-git workspace that contains an explicit agent marker file.
.TP
.B --allow-control-plane-vcs
Allow read-only Git status, diff, and staging visibility for otherwise masked
workspace control-plane paths. Workcell records this as
.BR workspace_control_plane=readonly-vcs
with
.BR session_assurance_initial=lower-assurance-control-plane-vcs .
.TP
.B --allow-arbitrary-command
Launch the runtime image with a direct container entrypoint after
.BR -- .
This is intended only for lower-assurance boundary debugging and is recorded in
the host audit log as a downgraded path.
.TP
.B --colima-profile NAME
Override the derived Colima profile name.
.TP
.B --vm-cpu COUNT
Set an explicit CPU count for the dedicated Colima VM.
.TP
.B --vm-memory GIB
Set an explicit memory size in GiB for the dedicated Colima VM.
.TP
.B --vm-disk GIB
Set an explicit disk size in GiB for the dedicated Colima VM.
.TP
.B --rebuild
Rebuild the runtime image before launch.
This is rejected on
.BR strict
unless
.B --prepare
is also set.
.TP
.B --dry-run
Print the selected runtime command and exit.
.TP
.B --doctor
Print derived profile and workspace state, identify whether the managed profile
or prepared image is missing, and emit the recommended next command without
launching the runtime. The preferred public form is the option form shown in
this manual;
.BR "workcell doctor"
remains accepted for CLI symmetry.
When the workspace path is missing or invalid, this reports that first instead
of recommending
.BR --prepare .
.TP
.B --inspect
Print the derived launch configuration, active assurance labels, injection
metadata, and latest retained host-log pointers without launching the runtime.
The preferred public form is the option form shown in this manual;
.BR "workcell inspect"
remains accepted for CLI symmetry.
.TP
.B --logs audit|debug|file-trace|transcript
Print the latest retained log of the selected type for the derived or explicit
Colima profile and exit. Also available as
.BR "workcell logs audit|debug|file-trace|transcript" .
.TP
.B --auth-status
Print the selected injection or credential posture derived from the rendered
injection manifest, including the primary provider auth mode, the ordered
provider auth mode set, SSH config assurance, and provider bootstrap summary
fields, and exit. The preferred public form is the option form shown in this
manual;
.BR "workcell auth-status"
remains accepted for CLI symmetry.
.TP
.B --gc
Remove stale host-side session audit and injection-bundle directories plus
broken latest-log pointers from managed profile state and exit. Also available
as
.BR "workcell gc" .
.TP
.B publish-pr
Prepare a host-side publication flow for the mounted workspace: switch to or
create a feature branch, optionally stage the worktree, create a signed commit,
push it, and open a GitHub pull request using host Git and GitHub CLI state.
Use
\fB--gh-bin\fR
to pin an explicit host GitHub CLI binary when needed, or use
.BR "workcell publish-pr --help"
for the full option set.
.TP
.B -h, --help
Show usage information.
.SH PROFILES
.TP
.B strict
Allowlisted network access only, no host credential or control socket
passthrough, and provider-native bounded or constrained mode only where the
selected provider actually offers one. On this profile, direct native ELF
execution from mutable
.I /workspace
and
.I /state
paths is blocked, and mutable shebang scripts cannot target protected real
runtimes directly.
This profile requires a prebuilt prepared runtime image and does not perform
cold builds or rebuilds unless
.B --prepare
explicitly tells Workcell to seed the image before continuing.
.TP
.B development
The same mount, masking, and secret restrictions as
.BR strict ,
but with managed non-provider command execution through the reviewed
development wrapper and broader network access for dependency, build, and repo
work. This path is surfaced in audit state as
.BR execution_path=lower-assurance-development .
.TP
.B build
The same mount and secret restrictions as
.BR strict
and
.BR development ,
with broader network access for dependency and build traffic.
Prepared runtime-image creation and rebuilds happen here.
.TP
.B breakglass
Still inside the Workcell VM plus container boundary, but with unrestricted
network access. The managed entrypoint does not auto-inject unsafe provider
flags; any adapter-specific high-trust launch is a lower-assurance direct
provider path. This profile requires
.BR --ack-breakglass .
.SH NODE SURFACE
The public
.B node
surface exposed by the managed runtime is intended for workspace JavaScript, not
for launching provider entrypoints, repackaged workspace copies of the shipped
provider package trees, or loading native addons. Workcell blocks those paths
on the safe profiles so public
.B node
execution cannot retake unmediated native code execution.
.SH FILES
.TP
.I ~/.local/bin/workcell
Installed launcher path used by
.BR scripts/install.sh ,
which auto-installs missing Homebrew packages on supported macOS hosts unless
.B --no-install-deps
is passed.
.TP
.I ~/.local/share/man/man1/workcell.1
Installed man page path used by
.BR scripts/install.sh .
.TP
.I scripts/install-workcell.sh
Internal repository installer implementation invoked by
.BR scripts/install.sh .
.TP
.I scripts/uninstall.sh
Repository helper that removes Workcell-owned install links, managed Colima
profiles, Workcell cache roots, and known Workcell temp artifacts without
touching shared host packages or
.IR ~/.config/workcell .
.TP
.I ~/.config/workcell/injection-policy.toml
Default optional host-side injection policy. If present, Workcell mounts
credential sources read-only from their original host paths and stages the rest
of its contents into per-session runtime state unless
.B --no-default-injection-policy
is set.
.TP
.I ~/.local/state/workcell/targets/local_vm/colima/PROFILE/workcell.audit.log
Durable host-side metadata audit log written by the managed launcher for real
runs.
.SH SESSION INJECTIONS
The safe path does not allow ambient host passthrough for secrets, SSH agents,
or provider state. The supported way to place consistent material into every
session is a host-side injection policy.
.PP
Workcell treats injected content as three classes:
.IP \(bu 2
Non-secret common or provider-specific instructions rendered into provider home
docs such as
.BR AGENTS.md ,
.BR CLAUDE.md ,
and
.BR GEMINI.md .
.IP \(bu 2
Provider-native credentials mounted read-only from their original host paths
and copied into the ephemeral session home.
.IP \(bu 2
Copied files or directories staged into
.I /state/injected
or a non-reserved path under the ephemeral session home.
.IP \(bu 2
SSH material copied into the ephemeral in-container
.I ~/.ssh
with strict permissions.
.PP
Secret-bearing injection sources must be owner-only host files or directories
and must not be symlinks. Standard world-readable
.I ssh known_hosts
files are accepted, but they must not be symlinks or group/world-writable.
Credential entries may be scoped to selected
providers or runtime modes, and unsafe raw
.I ssh_config
directives such as
.BR ProxyCommand
or
.BR Match\ exec
are rejected unless the operator explicitly opts into them.
.PP
The immutable adapter baselines under
.I adapters/
are never mutated in place. Repo-local
.BR AGENTS.md ,
.BR CLAUDE.md ,
and
.BR GEMINI.md
are masked inside the workspace and imported into the provider home docs
instead. Claude and Gemini import shared
.BR AGENTS.md
first and then append
.BR CLAUDE.md
or
.BR GEMINI.md
when present.
When those control-plane files or directories are tracked in git, Workcell
masks them with a read-only git-index snapshot so ordinary git status and
staging flows are not polluted by placeholder diffs.
If an operator intentionally needs to diff or stage live control-plane changes
inside Workcell, they must opt into
.B --allow-control-plane-vcs
and
.BR --ack-control-plane-vcs ,
which exposes those workspace paths read-only and lowers the reported session
assurance accordingly.
By default, Codex rules stay linked to the immutable adapter baseline
until prompt autonomy or package mutation has already downgraded the session.
If you explicitly opt into
.B --codex-rules-mutability session
Workcell seeds a session-local writable copy of the Codex rules tree so
provider-approved session amendments can persist across nested Codex launches
until the container exits, while the immutable adapter baseline under
.I adapters/
remains unchanged.
Reusable provider and GitHub auth should go through
.BR [credentials]
in the injection policy rather than generic copied files.
.SH FIRST RUN AND RECOVERY
Direct launch; Workcell prepares the reviewed runtime image automatically on the
first strict run when needed:
.IP
.EX
workcell --agent codex --workspace /path/to/repo
.EE
.PP
Make the prepare step explicit when you want to prewarm or pay the cold-start
cost before the interactive session:
.IP
.EX
workcell --prepare --agent codex --workspace /path/to/repo
.EE
.PP
Prewarm the prepared runtime image without launching:
.IP
.EX
workcell --prepare-only --agent codex --workspace /path/to/repo
.EE
.PP
Replace
.B codex
with
.B claude
or
.B gemini
for the corresponding provider.
.PP
Normal launch after the prepared image already exists:
.IP
.EX
workcell --agent codex --workspace /path/to/repo
.EE
.PP
Inspecting or diagnosing state without launching:
.IP
.EX
workcell --agent codex --inspect --workspace /path/to/repo
workcell --agent codex --doctor --workspace /path/to/repo
.EE
.PP
Capturing lower-assurance host logs explicitly:
.IP
.EX
workcell --agent codex --workspace /path/to/repo \\
  --log-level debug --debug-log ~/logs/workcell-debug.log
workcell --agent codex --workspace /path/to/repo \\
  --audit-transcript ~/logs/workcell-transcript.log
.EE
.PP
Viewing the latest retained host logs for a profile:
.IP
.EX
workcell --agent codex --workspace /path/to/repo --logs audit
workcell --agent codex --workspace /path/to/repo --logs debug
.EE
.PP
Detached session lifecycle on the host:
.IP
.EX
workcell session start --agent codex --workspace /path/to/repo
workcell session list
workcell session list --verbose
workcell session send --id SESSION_ID --message "continue with tests"
workcell session stop --id SESSION_ID
workcell session show --id SESSION_ID
workcell session show --id SESSION_ID --text
workcell session delete --id SESSION_ID
.EE
.PP
The verbose inventory adds target, workspace transport, git branch, and
worktree columns without changing the default compact table.
.B workcell session show --text
and the detached control commands
.BR "workcell session start" ,
.BR "workcell session send" ,
and
.BR "workcell session stop"
emit stable key=value output so host-side automation can inspect or steer one
session without parsing human-oriented prose.
.PP
Use direct detached workspace mode when you intentionally want to keep the
session on the live workspace path instead of a clean session-owned clone:
.IP
.EX
workcell session start --session-workspace direct --agent codex --workspace /path/to/repo
.EE
.PP
Prompted launch for a selected provider:
.IP
.EX
workcell --agent claude --agent-autonomy prompt --workspace /path/to/repo
.EE
.PP
Passing provider flags without repeating the provider command:
.IP
.EX
workcell --agent gemini --agent-arg --version --workspace /path/to/repo
.EE
.PP
Publishing a prepared workspace snapshot from the host side:
.IP
.EX
workcell publish-pr --workspace /path/to/repo --branch feature/name \\
  --title-file /tmp/pr-title.txt --body-file /tmp/pr-body.md \\
  --commit-message-file /tmp/commit-message.txt
.EE
.PP
Using an explicit injection policy:
.IP
.EX
workcell --prepare --agent codex --workspace /path/to/repo \\
  --injection-policy ~/.config/workcell/injection-policy.toml
.EE
.PP
If Workcell reports an unmanaged Colima profile, rerun with:
.IP
.EX
workcell --repair-profile --agent codex --workspace /path/to/repo
.EE
.PP
Replace
.B codex
with
.B claude
or
.B gemini
for the corresponding provider.
.SH EXIT STATUS
The command exits non-zero on validation failures, unsupported modes, missing
dependencies, or runtime launch errors.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR colima (1),
.BR docker (1)
